[WIP] Terraform Docs for TF policy (#2690)
hashicorp/web-unified-docs: content/terraform-policy/v0.1.x (beta)/docs/policy/why.mdx

---

> page_title: Why Terraform policy?

Reviewer: I think we created this page because there is [precedent for it in the Sentinel docs](https://developer.hashicorp.com/sentinel/docs/why), but I don't think it's a model we want to continue. I propose making the following changes:

- Move the benefit-y content to the overview page under a single "Benefits" heading. A lot of it is repetitive and can be edited down. 
- Recast this page as an explanation of the differences between each policy framework. We'll need a clearer file name and title.  Maybe "compare.mdx" and "Terraform policy as code framework comparison"?

I'm adding this comment after I reviewed the benefits section, but the comments are still mostly valid.

description: >-
  Learn about the benefits of Terraform policy and how it differs from other policy frameworks.
---

# Why Terraform policy?

Terraform policy is a declarative, HCL-based policy as code solution deeply integrated with Terraform. It provides native support for evaluating policies at multiple stages of the Terraform lifecycle, from initialization through post-apply validation.

@include "partials/beta.mdx"

## Key benefits

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Benefits

Terraform policy provides the following benefits.
```
[Don't stack headings and other elements](https://github.com/hashicorp/web-unified-docs/blob/main/docs/style-guide/general/content-organization.md#do-not-place-the-same-type-of-content-elements-next-to-each-other)

### Native HCL syntax

> Terraform policy uses the same HCL configuration language as Terraform itself. Policy blocks, locals, and enforce blocks follow familiar Terraform patterns, eliminating the need to learn a new language. This reduces the learning curve and enables faster policy development for teams already using Terraform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Terraform policy implements HCL syntax. As a result, `policy` blocks, `locals`, and `enforce` blocks follow familiar Terraform patterns, eliminating the need to learn a new language. This reduces the learning curve and enables faster policy development for teams already using Terraform.
```

### Deep Terraform integration

Terraform policy is tightly integrated with Terraform's execution model, enabling capabilities that external policy frameworks cannot provide:

- **Early validation**: Provider and module policies are evaluated during `terraform init`, before any downloads occur.
- **Post-apply evaluation**: Policies can validate provider-computed values (ARNs, IDs, ports) that are only known after resources are provisioned.
- **Resource relationship queries**: Built-in functions like `core::getresources()` make it easy to validate relationships between resources.

> - **Data source lookups**: Policies can query data source results directly using `core::getdatasource()` to enforce dynamic requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Early validation: Terraform evaluates provider and module policies are during the `terraform init` operation before any downloads occur.
- Post-apply evaluation: Policies can validate provider-computed values, such as ARNs, IDs, and ports, that are only known after Terraform provisions resources.
- Resource relationship queries: Use built-in functions, such as `core::getresources()`, to validate relationships between resources.
- Data source lookups: Policies can query data source results directly using `core::getdatasource()` to enforce dynamic requirements.
```
Bold for UI elements and to introduce new terms, not semantic emphasis. 
"Like" means "similar to". "Such as" means "for example".
Don't editorialize on how simple or difficult things are. 

Also, is there reference docs we can point people to for more information about built-in functions? Are we talking bout functions built into the TFP framework? Or do we mean provider functions?

### Flexible enforcement levels

Terraform policy supports three enforcement levels:

- **Advisory**: HCP Terraform will warn the user of the policy violation, but will not block the run.
- **Mandatory-overridable**: HCP Terraform will block the run if the policy fails before the apply phase, but a user with the `Manage policy overrides` permission can override the policy violation and continue the run.

> - **Mandatory**: HCP Terraform will blocks the run if the policy fails before the apply phase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Terraform policy supports enforcement levels for customizing how to proceed when Terraform detects a violation. Refer to [Policy enforcement levels](/terraform/cloud-docs/workspaces/policy-enforcement/manage-policy-sets#policy-enforcement-levels) for details.
```

### Support for Terraform workflows

> Terraform policy works Terraform workspaces, covering multi-component and multi-environment deployments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Not sure this is adding any value

## Comparison with Sentinel

Terraform policy is the policy as code framework HashiCorp recommends for Terraform workflows.

| Feature | Sentinel | Terraform policy |
|---------|----------|------------------|

> | **Policy language** | Sentinel DSL: a purpose-built policy language with its own syntax and type system | HCL: the same configuration language used to write Terraform |

Reviewer: I won't add all the style guide violations as suggestions, but make sure to unbold text unless it refers to a UI label and remove colons unless it introduces a list.

## Feature deep dives

The following sections provide detailed comparisons of key Terraform policy capabilities against both Sentinel and OPA.

### Evaluating resource relationships

**Use cases**:

- Require every S3 bucket to have a corresponding versioning resource with `status = "Enabled"`
- Require every IAM role to have at least one policy attached
- Require every security group to have an explicit egress rule

**Terraform policy** provides the `core::getresources(type, filter)` function, which fetches related resources by type and attribute. The filter is applied at evaluation time, returning only matching candidates. This makes relationship checks concise and readable.

**Sentinel** can achieve this by iterating over tfplan/v2 resource changes and filtering by type, but there is no structured helper API. Correlating two resource types by a shared attribute requires manually iterating both collections and matching by value. For deeply nested relationships across multiple resource types, this becomes difficult to write and maintain. Results can also be unpredictable when the linking attribute is unknown at plan time.

> **OPA** can achieve this since the full plan JSON is available, allowing you to cross-reference resource types in Rego, but there is no structured helper API. Comparing two resource types by a shared attribute requires raw array comprehensions over `input.plan.resource_changes`. For deeply nested relationships across multiple resource types it becomes difficult to read and maintain.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
## Example use cases

The following examples describe how each policy framework supported by Terraform uses a different mechanism to enforce policies. 

### Evaluate resource relationships

Each framework enforces the following policies using a different mechanism:

- Require every S3 bucket to have a corresponding versioning resource with `status = "Enabled"`
- Require every IAM role to have at least one policy attached
- Require every security group to have an explicit egress rule

<Tabs>

<Tab heading="Terraform policy" group="tfp">

Uses the `core::getresources(type, filter)` function to fetch related resources by type and attribute. The filter is applied at evaluation time, returning only matching candidates. This makes relationship checks concise and readable.

</Tab>

<Tab heading="Sentinel" group="sentinel">

Iterates the [`tfplan/v2` import](/sentinel/docs/features/terraform/tfplan-v2) to find resource changes. Sentinel filters by type, but there is no structured helper API. Correlating two resource types by a shared attribute requires manually iterating both collections and matching by value. Deeply nested relationships across multiple resource types requires additional effort to write and maintain. Results can also be unpredictable when the linking attribute is unknown at plan time.

</Tab>

<Tab heading="OPA" group="opt">

Because the full plan JSON is available, you can cross-reference resource types in Rego, but there is no structured helper API. Comparing two resource types by a shared attribute requires raw array comprehensions over `input.plan.resource_changes`. Deeply nested relationships across multiple resource types requires additional effort to write and maintain.

</Tab>

</Tabs>
````
Double check my syntax, but use this as a template for the other examples.  I would expect a more detailed discussion for a section presented as a  "deep dive". Besides, "deep dive" sounds too colloquial to me.

### Post-apply evaluations

**Use cases**:

- Verify that values that are only known after the apply is complete, such as ARNs, IDs, or assigned networking ports, meet policy requirements
- Surface policy violations immediately after apply so teams can remediate quickly

**Terraform policy** evaluates policies after the apply phase is complete, which means that you can write policies against values that are only known once the provider has provisioned the resource. The apply is not blocked, but any violations are surfaced immediately as errors so teams can act on them right away.

**Sentinel** is only invoked during the plan/policy check stage of a run. There is no built-in mechanism to evaluate policy against post-apply values. Catching violations on provider-computed attributes would require a custom external pipeline.

**OPA** on HCP Terraform is invoked only at the plan/policy check stage. There is no built-in mechanism to re-evaluate policy against the live infrastructure state after `terraform apply`. Catching violations on provider-computed attributes would require a custom external pipeline.

## Migration from existing policies

> Terraform policy represents a significant shift in how the policy engine interacts with Terraform. Existing Sentinel and OPA policies will require migration to the new HCL-based syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Migration from existing policies

Terraform policy represents a significant shift in how the policy engine interacts with Terraform. To use existing Sentinel and OPA policies, you must migrate to the HCL-based syntax.
```
1. How do you do this? By "migrate", do we mean "rewrite as HCL" or is there a tool or method for transforming the policy code. 
2. This seems out of place here. I would move this the overview.
